---
layout: post
title: Unbiasing Collaborative Filtering for Popularity-Aware Recommendation accepted for publication@SEBD'21
# categories: [Publications, News]
---

Paper ["Unbiasing Collaborative Filtering for Popularity-Aware Recommendation (Discussion Paper)"](http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-2994/paper51.pdf) has been officially accepted for publication @SEBD'21. 
Joint work with Luciano Caroprese, Giuseppe Manco, Francesco Sergio Pisani and Ettore Ritacco from ICAR-CNR. 

It is a discussion paper where we show some promising results regarding debiasing techniques used to tackle Popularity Bias in a Collaborative Filtering setting.

1. We propose a model called Ranking Variational Auto Encoder(RVAE) that combines VAE with the well-known BPR loss. 

2. We analyze the model predictions by disaggregating the Hit Rate on low-, mid- and high-popular items. 
We observe a huge disparity between these three classes of items with low-popular items extremely penalized.

3. We apply three debiasing techniques: 
    1. a reweighting scheme which balances the errors by enhancing the loss inversely proportional to the positive item popularity. This is an adaptation of the classical IPS approach \[1\].
    2. an oversampling scheme which increases the amount of training triplets having low-popular items as the positive instance.
    3. an ensemble mechanism that corrects the predictions of the baseline model by adding the scores computed by a model trained only on low-popular items.

4. We show promising results in terms of recovering performances on low-popular items while retaining (or even improving) the overall accuracy obtained by the baseline model.
  
  
References:

\[1\]: Schnabel, T., Swaminathan, A., Singh, A., Chandak, N., & Joachims, T. (2016, June). [Recommendations as treatments: Debiasing learning and evaluation. In international conference on machine learning](http://proceedings.mlr.press/v48/schnabel16.html) (pp. 1670-1679). PMLR.
